[FEATURE] Rules for TYPO3 Units (#49)
TYPO3-Documentation/Policy: Documentation/Community/Units/RulesForTypo3Units.rst

3.1.2 Deputy Coordinator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

..  _unit-rules-deputy-coordinator-a:

a. Tasks
""""""""

The Deputy Unit Coordinator’s primary task is to support the Unit
Coordinator and execute tasks as delegated by the Unit Coordinator.

..  _unit-rules-deputy-coordinator-b:

b. Acting Unit Coordinator
""""""""""""""""""""""""""

If the Unit Coordinator is indisposed or while the Unit Coordinator
position is unfilled, the Deputy Unit Coordinator serves as the acting
Unit Coordinator, taking over all related tasks and responsibilities.

..  _unit-rules-deputy-coordinator-c:

c. Rights and Obligations
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

Unless stated otherwise, the Deputy Unit Coordinator’s rights and
obligations are equal to those of a Unit Member.

..  _unit-rules-member:

3.1.3 Member
~~~~~~~~~~~~

..  _unit-rules-member-a:

a. Definition
"""""""""""""

Unit Members are individuals with relevant knowledge and expertise that
are permanent and consistent contributors to the fulfillment of tasks
under the Unit’s Charter.

..  _unit-rules-member-b:

b. Accountability
"""""""""""""""""

Though Unit Members should be awarded a large degree of freedom in task

> selection, Unit Members answer to the Unit Coordinator and must fulfill

Reviewer: ```suggestion
selection, Unit Members answer to the Unit Coordinator and are expected to fulfill
```

Reviewer: Plus maybe something expressing something like this:

A volunteer must not be pressured against their will to fulfill a task, but active effort must be spent on issues the Unit coordinator / team prioritizes and schedules. Mediation and conselling is available to resolve issues. 

As a team member, the preface is to work as a unit and not in fractured, unfocussed bits an pieces.

(Not happy with the words, but maybe this takes the edge off? @oliverklee @mabolek ?)

Author: Thank you, @garvinhicking! 

I'll take this back to the Governance Working Group.

PS! "Are expected to" isn't part of RFC2119's list of definitions (see [Note on imperatives](https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/Policy/pull/49/changes#diff-2261a0345010f6c8082f3d3955f48d63bba169f6adebaa93b193431d8bb70b39R12-R15)). I wonder if what you're suggesting is effectively a move from "must" to "should." For more clarity, feel free to elaborate on how you understand it.

Reviewer 2: In informal German legalese, what I learned is "'soll' ist 'muss' wenn kann" (roughly translates to "should means must if one can do"). So yes, "should" is probably close to "expected to". You still can not do that, but the expectation is otherwise.

> delegated tasks promptly and to the best of their ability.

Reviewer 3: This is one of the two points that keep me from becoming a unit member. I am willing to decide what to do together with other people (e.g., decide with my team for our team), but I'm _not_ willing to take orders from anyone as part of my volunteer work. This is a hard no-go for me.

Author: Hi @oliverklee! That is a fully acceptable position within the framework of the proposal and an opinion that should be respected.

Reviewer 3: Hi @mabolek! I don't understand what you're trying to say. Could you please reword your reply?

Reviewer 3: Some more background on this: During my many years of activity in the TYPO3 community, I have encountered mutiple instances of the Association Board deciding things over the heads of active community members and without taking the community members' best interests into account, and the Board did not try to repair the trust damaged by these actions afterwards. This is why I'm not willing to agree to take orders from the Board or bodies to which the Board can issue orders.

Author: Hi @oliverklee!

I'm very sorry about your previous experiences.

I'm saying that you are allowed to disagree with this proposal. For the benefit of you and other readers, I'm emphasizing that this is totally OK and normal.

You are providing valid concerns, but the Governance Working Group has to weigh up multiple mutually incompatible concerns and make a choice. As I explained in [a previous comment](https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/Policy/pull/49#issuecomment-5252525220), the emphasis has been on improving governance, and the hope is that the Unit Supporter role can accommodate others, yourself included. That you disagree with this prioritization is duly noted.

The ongoing process concerning the units will conclude in an extraordinary General Assembly, where the TYPO3 Association members will have their say. The General Assembly is the TYPO3 Association Members' meeting and the supreme governing body of the TYPO3 Association.

Reviewer: Personally, I am also not willing to take orders.

What I'm willing to do is hear out my team/unit lead on what he asks of me if I can help out / take on a task, and hear why they think I'm helpful for it.

What I'm not willing to do is to perform a task that gives me no joy or I deem not needed or not understand the reasoning. I would refuse that and then "see what happens".

I am quite sure of two things:

1. All volunteers will see it like this

2. All unit leads will understand they rather take our offered support than to make us do things against our willingness. And if that happens, we will raise new PRs against this repo and make petitions to change this, if it gets an issue.

I appreciate you (Oli) stated this before I had the time to, because I also think this passage can easily become a deal breaker and make the project lead towards Gmbh-only powered workforce without volunteer effort within teams.

I understand the need/want to have this passage, but I'm willing to see if/when a fallout actually comes forward. I see it a bit like a Kreditvertrag; it is made to ensure the worst possible reality and judging from my team experience, I just hope it'll never play out in reality like this. ;)

Reviewer 4: I see your and @oliverklee concerns! I can completely understand them. I feel a bit frustrated because not a lot of people a joining the discussion. I tried to post about it but people dont react. Thanks again @oliverklee and @garvinhicking !

Author: > I see it a bit like a Kreditvertrag; it is made to ensure the worst possible reality and judging from my team experience

Hi @garvinhicking! Yes, this is a good way to explain the thought behind this clause. A _Kreditvertrag_ in German would maybe be something out of a responsibility model? We've used the word _accountability_ in some conversations. Maybe _emergency valve_?

A case where this clause (or the second half of it) could come into effect would be an imagined case where the Feature Unit has two major features left to complete before release. The Unit Coordinator sees that it will only be possible to complete one of them, and only if those working on the other feature come and help.

This should be discussed in the Unit Council and everyone would most likely agree which feature to focus on. ("Taking one for the team.") But if that doesn't work out, the Unit Coordinator would have to choose (invoking this clause), because it's better with one feature finished than none.

Feel free to suggest a better way to write this clause.

Author: > I feel a bit frustrated because not a lot of people a joining the discussion. I tried to post about it but people dont react.

Hi @Esders! We're planning to send out an extra Association Member Newsletter to highlight this and other recent news in the next few days. Yesterday's University Days article was the final item on the content list.

Reviewer 2: > the Board did not try to repair the trust damaged by these actions

@oliverklee I get where you're coming from, but it is probably a bit hard to ask a very different group of people to repair things that someone else broke way back, without probably knowing about this very specific issue _some_ people have. Not trying to invalidate anything of what you're saying, I'm just trying to highlight the other side, too.

As for the rest, I can only second what @garvinhicking has said. If this turns into a command-and-control situation where the unit coordinators suddenly get a power trip and try to behave like a boss with people that are doing voluntary work, this will likely end bad. But I think this is also a very obvious thing, so I hope everyone who ends up in the position of a unit coordinator will refrain from any such endeavor.

*  Coordinator, answerable to the Unit Coordinator, etc.
*  Deputy Coordinator
*  Members
*  Council
*  Supporters

..  _unit-rules-optional-roles-b:

b. Size
"""""""

Optional Structures must consist of at least two people. Coordinator and
Deputy Coordinator are required roles.

..  _unit-rules-optional-roles-c:

c. Inability to Elect Coordinator
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

If an Optional Structure consists of fewer than five people and it is
unable to select Coordinator and Deputy, the Unit Coordinator must
disband the Optional Structure.

..  _unit-rules-optional-roles-d:

d. Role Elegibility
"""""""""""""""""""

Unit Members can be Coordinators, Deputy Coordinators, and Members
within an Optional Structure. Unit Supporters can only hold a Supporter
role within an Optional Structure.

..  _unit-rules-external-affiliation:

3.3 External Affiliation
------------------------

..  _unit-rules-t3a-membership:

3.3.1 Membership in the TYPO3 Association
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

..  _unit-rules-t3a-membership-a:

a. Required Association Membership
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The role of Coordinator, Deputy Coordinator, and Member in a Unit

> requires active personal memberships in the TYPO3 Association.

Reviewer 3: This is not what I heard from reports from the Dialogue Days - I heard that it was decided that it's not required to be an Association member in order to be a Unit member. Is this report incorrect, or was this changed after the Dialogue Days.?

Author: Hi @oliverklee! The Dialogue Days were not a decision-making body and no decisions were made. It was announced as "[two days of structured dialogue](https://news.typo3.com/article/dialogue-days-july-2026#:~:text=two%20days%20of%20structured%20dialogue)." The [lead of the recap](https://news.typo3.com/article/dialogue-days-recap#:~:text=leaving%20the%20assessment%2C%20prioritization%2C%20and%20formal%20decisions%20to%20the%20next%20stages%20of%20the%20process) says: "Two intensive days made shared priorities, concerns, and responsibilities more visible, while _leaving the assessment, prioritization, and formal decisions to the next stages of the process_." (My emphasis.) For the benefit of a good process, I hope we can keep this review to what is written in the actual proposal texts. 🙂

Reviewer 3: I'm asking here because this seems to be the only place available for this. (In the Talk thread, you explicitly asked to move all discussion here.)

What I meant was this: "At the DD, it was communicated that their had been a decision that …". Is this report incorrect, or was this changed after the Dialogue Days?

Author: Hi @oliverklee! What you heard is incorrect. No decisions have yet been made concerning the Unit proposals. It is the text _in this PR_ and the [PR for the Rules for the TYPO3 Unit Cooperation Panel](https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/Policy/pull/50) that constitutes the current proposal that should be discussed here.

Reviewer 2: @oliverklee I was present and I don't remember any explicit "veto" from the crowd against the membership requirement (and that would have been the only thing we could have gotten, since there was no formal voting whatsoever).
I also second what @o-ba has said earlier in this thread about assoc membership and having a say in the project going together. We just have to ensure that membership is accessible for everyone (which IMO is the case with the Community membership tier) and that anyone feels welcome as a part of the assoc. But that is something everyone of us has to work on (and given that we have 1000+ members we don't seem to be such an unwelcoming crowd…).

..  _unit-rules-reporting:

4.2 Regular Reporting
---------------------

..  _unit-rules-reporting-a:

a. Regularity
"""""""""""""

The Unit Coordinator must regularly publish overview reports on the
Unit’s activities and budget status to the TYPO3 Association Members.

..  _unit-rules-reporting-b:

b. Report Contents
""""""""""""""""""

The report must contain information on active and completed tasks for
the reporting period, as well as a forecast of expected active and
completed tasks for the following period.

..  _unit-rules-reporting-c:

c. Publication Platform
"""""""""""""""""""""""

The report must be published on
`news.typo3.com <http://news.typo3.com>`__ every three months, unless
otherwise stated in the Unit Charter.

..  _unit-rules-criteria:

4.3 Contribution Rules and Acceptance Criteria
----------------------------------------------

..  _unit-rules-criteria-a:

a. Publication and Platform
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""

In consultation with the Unit Council, the Unit Coordinator must publish
rules and objective acceptance criteria for contributions on a suitable
platform, as specified by the TYPO3 Association Board or the Unit

> Charter.

Reviewer 3: How does this fit with the current situation where different teams have very difference acceptance criteria, e.g., the Documentation Team works in quite a different way compared to the Best Practices Team, which works in different ways than the Education Committee?

Author: Hi @oliverklee! The intention is that Units should work with the same acceptance rules and criteria. The Unit Cooperation Panel has the additional responsibility of "Coordination and harmonization of Contribution Rules and Acceptance Criteria" ([Section 4.1, point 3](https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/Policy/pull/50/changes#diff-67af9a855de77385b885350806eb29d8047304855cba9d302296bd0aff1e3780R99-R100)). The goal with this is to make collaboration and contribution easier both within Units, between Units, and from the outside.

Reviewer 3: I understand the intention. Still, your reply doesn't answer my question. My question was and is how uniform acceptance criteria for a unit can cater to different teams/working groups within a unit working in quite different ways and hence would require different acceptance criteria (and in general, different ways to organize their work).

And to reword this: I think that having uniform acceptance critieria and uniform ways to organize things within a unit is a problem and does not fit well with the teams working in different ways, i.e., doing what works best for them.

Author: Hi @oliverklee! Your wish for full independence and self-determination, at the level you describe, may be incompatible with the wish for harmonization as a way to make collaboration and contribution easier. A goal for the Unit concept is to avoid isolation and silo thinking. At the same time, harmonization does not mean that specific needs cannot be addressed within that search for unity.

Reviewer 2: @oliverklee I think this is not as big of an issue as it may seem at first. But I think we clearly lack widely accepted criteria for what constitutes a good contribution, at least from some examples I've seen over the past few months, where contributions were shot down with "I don't like that" (paraphrased) instead of giving helpful feedback.

I think this is also something that the "old crowd" (not pointing to anyone specifically here, just a general observation) has to get accustomed to: our role in the project must and should change a bit. Since we all have quite a few years of experience on our back, we must not forget that not everyone has that much experience, and also mentor people with less experience into a direction where they can gain our level of experience (or, even better, more experience).
To me, that also means that any feedback we give to everything someone else does should always be helpful, up to a certain degree – if something is clearly against established policy, that should also be pointed out, but it should be clearly stated. And, probably more important, these squishy "this is how we do it here" rules must become more codified. Yes, dreaded bureaucracy, but what we're doing here is serious business, not your average weekend escape-from-reality project.
